# Background Information

The Wage and Hour Division (WHD) was created more than 75 years ago with the enactment of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). WHD is responsible for enforcing labor laws, such as minimum wage, overtime, child labor, transportation and housing safety and health for migrant agricultural workers,    prevailing wage requirements for employees working under certain federal contracts, rights related to family medical leave, and labor standards under certain immigration programs.

The agency has a nationwide staff of investigators, supervisors, analysts, technicians, and administrative employees. WHD has approximately 1,800 employees; nearly 1,050 of which are field investigators. More than half of these investigators are multi-lingual.  The agency is headquartered in Washington, D.C.; however, most of its employees are stationed in over 220 field, area, district, and regional offices across the country and in United States territories. These offices are in rural, suburban, and urban locations.

Every day, WHD investigators go into workplaces—ranging from blueberry fields, to restaurant kitchens, to garment shops—to conduct investigations to determine if the businesses are in compliance with the applicable laws.  Investigators use a wide range of techniques to gather evidence.  They collect paper and digital payroll and employment records from employers, interview workers and employers and document interview statements, conduct surveillance, observe and document workplace conditions, and then analyze this information to determine whether the employer is in compliance with the applicable laws.  Investigations often require collaboration with teams of investigators, managers, legal counsel, and other government agencies.  If WHD determines there has been a violation of law, the agency will resolve the case by requiring the employer to remedy the situation.  Depending on the law in question, employers may be required to pay back wages and other penalties, reinstate employees in their jobs, and put in place new policies and procedures to ensure they remain in compliance. If an investigation reveals that an employer failed to pay proper wages, WHD makes computations, assesses monetary penalties, and supervises the payment of these monies to the U.S. Treasury and/or directly to the underpaid employees. Some cases result in the decision to take legal action in coordination with the Department’s Office of the Solicitor or other law enforcement agencies.

WHD’s enforcement activities can originate with employees coming forward to file a complaint or by WHD initiating an investigation directly because of evidence of a high-rate of non-compliance in a particular industry.  Whether conducting complaint or directed investigations, WHD needs improved capabilities to enter data into our legacy computer system.